Анто́н Ива́нович Дени́кин
Anton Ivanovich Denikin
(Lt. General, Russian Imperial Army)
Очерки русской смуты. Борьба генерала Корнилова. Август 1917 г. – апрель 1918 г.
Sketches of Russian Distemper: The Struggle of General Kornilov, August 1917 - April 1918. 


Kalinkovichi Railway Station
11 October 1917

Предполагалась враждебная встреча на станции Калинковичи, где сосредоточено было много тыловых учреждений, но ее проехали ранним утром, и вокзал был пусть. Из конского вагона в Житомире нас перевели в товарный - приспособленный, с нарами, на который мы тотчас улеглись, и после пережитых впечатлений вероятно все заснули мертвым сном. Когда проснулись утром - вся обстановка в вагоне так разительно отличалась от той вчерашней, которая еще давила на мозг и память, как тяжелое похмелье... Наша стража - караульные юнкера - относились к нам с трогательным, каким-то застенчивым вниманием. Помощник фронтового комиссара Григорьев, зашедший в вагон, воодушевленно рассказывал, как его на вокзале "помяли" и как он "честил" революционную толпу. Казалось, что мы находимся в кругу своих доброжелателей, и единственный, кто чувствует себя арестованным, это - очередной комитетский делегат, вооруженный револьвером в какой-то огромной кобуре, хранящий молчание и беспокойно поглядывающий по сторонам.

A hostile meeting was supposed at Kalinkovichi station, where many rear institutions were concentrated, but it was passed early in the morning, and the station was let. From the horse-drawn car in Zhytomyr, we were transferred to a commodity car — adapted, with a bunker, to which we had already settled down, and after the experience we had experienced, everyone probably went to sleep in a dead sleep. When we woke up in the morning, the whole situation in the car was so strikingly different from that of yesterday, which was still pressing on the brain and memory, like a heavy hangover ... Our guards — guard junkers — treated us with touching, somewhat shy attention. The assistant front-line commissar Grigoriev, who entered the carriage, enthusiastically told how he was “crushed” at the station and how he “honored” the revolutionary crowd.


=================

Vladimir Lyakin. "Kalinkovichi in the spring of 1917"
<https://belisrael.info/?p=9997>
Posted 03/11/2017 11:49 PM


One of the books of the famous writer Valentin Pikul begins like this: “It happened recently - just a hundred years ago.” In essence - the truth. Since the end of the 50s of the last century, when I went to school, I remember among adult relatives, neighbors, and just acquaintances, elderly, but still strong and active people who were born and raised even “behind the royal hour”. I heard their interesting, vivid stories about life “with the sisters,” yes, it’s a pity, I didn’t write it down, I remember little. The last of the Kalinkovich residents, witnesses and participants of the revolutionary events that crushed the Russian empire, died 20-30 years ago. But those days, fateful for the whole country, each of its inhabitants and us, their descendants, can be reconstructed on the basis of preserved archival and other documents.

Tuesday, February 28 (old style) of 1917, at the Kalinkovichi railway station that was lost in the woods and marshes of the Belarusian Polesye (until 1914 was called “Mazyr”), did not stand out from the sequence of the previous ones. From the very beginning of Christmas there was a strong cold, it happened to minus thirty degrees, because of which the peasants of the surrounding villages greatly reduced the supply of food to the markets in the town and at the station. From time to time, the railway tracks were covered with huge snow drifts, which were cleared not only by station workers and soldiers of the artillery depots of the Western Front located here, but even Germans, Austrians and Turks who were kept in the camp near Mozyr. However, every cloud has a silver lining: heavy snowfalls and low clouds have made it impossible to blow airborne enemy planes and airplanes from the air. Though hard, but this most important railway junction in the front-line zone for the Russian command, which became such a little over a year ago after the discovery of traffic on the Zhlobin-Ovruch section, coped with its tasks. And today, two passenger and freight trains proceeded through the station, in the direction of Petrograd and Odessa, respectively; from the west, from the front line - the sanitary train; to the west, to the front of Pinsk, there are several echelons with troops and ammunition.

On the yellow-painted wall of the railway station hung a large, typographically printed poster calling for signing up for a military loan: “You are only for a time to lend to the Homeland of savings! All bonds will be redeemed before October 1, 1926 ". An old man with a barrel organ wandered around the station square, waiting for visitors. A black raven perched on his shoulder for a snout pulled his beak out of a small drawer of a note with predictions. They have always been good for everyone: sudden profits, good health, joyful meeting. And none of the local residents and the military who were here for military service had any idea that it was during those hours, far to the north, in the capital of the Russian Empire, great events take place - a revolution!

On February 23, the streets of Petrograd were filled with women exhausted by standing in bread lines, to which striking workers began to join. Over their columns slogans "Down with the war!", "Bread!" On February 24, more than two hundred thousand people participated in the general political strike in the city. The next day was fatal for the 300-year reign of the Romanovs. At about three o'clock in the afternoon, police officer Krylov, with several policemen and a Cossack platoon, arrived at Znamenskaya Square to stop the rally at the monument to Alexander III. Having seen a red flag in the center of the crowd, the police officer personally rushed to take it away and ... received a saber blow on the head from a Cossack from his squad! The demonstrators finished off Krylov, the other policemen fled. On the same and the following days, the police used weapons against the people who had come to the streets, shed blood.

On February 27, the soldiers of the reserve battalion of the Volyn Infantry Regiment (the regiment itself was at the front), received orders to shoot at the protesters, massacred their commander, chose the senior sergeant-major T.I. Soon, the Volyntsev example was followed by the reserve battalions of the Lithuanian and Preobrazhensky guards regiments. After that, the transition of the troops of the Petrograd garrison to the side of the rebels took on an avalanche-like character: in the morning — 10 thousand, in the afternoon — 25 thousand, in the evening — 70 thousand bayonets. With the dawn of February 28, most of the two hundred thousandth capital garrison and all sailors of the Baltic Fleet were on the side of the revolution. By order of the established Petrograd Soviet of Workers' Deputies, they occupied the objects of telegraph, telephone and arsenals, The arrests of the tsarist government began The crowd made reprisals against gendarmes and policemen who did not manage to escape; dozens of them were drowned in the Neva and Fontanka.

... And outside the Kalinkovichi railway station and seven more separate settlements adjacent to it (about 4.2 thousand people in total, including soldiers of the garrison), which were then located within the present boundaries of the city of Kalinkovichi, there was an intense, disturbing front-line life. For a few more days (and in the remote rural corners and from a fortnight), people did not know anything about the upcoming great historical changes and did not guess about the future unprecedented trials.

... The old town then numbered about 250 households, where 2.8 thousand people lived. The longest was Pochtovaya Street (now the central part of Sovetskaya Street) - from the Kalenkovka River to the St. Nicholas Church and a little behind it. North of it was a small side street Dyakovsky (now part of Proletarskaya street), to the south - Baranovsky street, Zelenaya and Gymnasia streets (now part of Kalinin, Krasnoarmeysky and Lunacharsky streets).

“Three kilometers from the station, beyond the forest,” we read in the memoirs of railroad’s son D.G. Sergievich (1912-2004) - there was a place of the same name - Kalinkovichi. Or rather, it was from the town that the station got its name, when a hundred years ago it was laid through all Polesie, from Bryansk to Brest, the railway.Residents of the station on Sundays, and on weekdays, walked straight through the forest there, to the market, for their various purchases. As for the peasants of the surrounding villages and villages, following the age-old tradition, they brought the products and goods of their peasant production to the town in order to sell them or exchange them for the industrial goods they need: sugar, salt, kerosene, manufactory, matches, etc. . Gentlemen with canes in their hands smiled on painted signs, women and men’s tailors offering their services. Next to them, sometimes in the same room, shoemakers knocked with their hammers. In the barbershop, the peasants who came to the market trimmed their beards. And right there, on the square, the Sunday Bazaar was rustling and iridescent. ”

This description is complemented by the memories of MG Gerchikova (1904-1966) , whose childhood took place in the town itself. “... In Kalinkovichi the majority of the population was Jewish. There was no longer the usual peasant hut. They were replaced by ordinary one-story wooden houses. The main street was paved with cobblestones. There were several shops, a pharmacy, a fire station, a two-year school . ” We add that in the precincts of the town there were 34 retail shops (almost all - on Pochtovaya street and the market square, which was then approximately at the site of the Pripyat restaurant), shoemaking and wheel shops. Behind its outskirts is a steam mill with a grinder and butter churn, two horse grinders, a small brick, leather and soap factory. 4 forges.

At that time there were only a few dozen residents of the Christian faith. The families of the former and current psalm-readers of St. Nicholas Orthodox Church (now the House of Children's Art) lived in Dyakovsky Lane. Behind the bridge over the Kalenkovka river there were the houses of the priest S. Lavrovsky (he is also the teacher of the parochial school), the landowner A. Gorvat (his manager lived there), the older railway switchman I.K. Subbotin, well-off tradesman Badey. At the beginning of the street. Baranovskaya lived resident D.I. Baranovsky, in fact, gave the street its name. On the Gymnasium street, in the room of a medical assistant there lived the family of the doctor M. O. Bartashevich (in the picture in the center), and a little to the south, just opposite the cemetery, the military department built and maintained a so-called medical service with the staff. “Cholera barrack” for local and “lower ranks” taken from trains.

In early 1917, the chairman of the Kalinkovichi petty-bourgeois government was a wealthy merchant (he had a big house and a shop in 4 rooms) Z. Zelenko. (picture, approximately, 1920-21)

The merchants H. Gammelstein (several thousand rubles of annual turnover), B. Medvednik, M. Myshelov, S. Golod, A. Lazbin, S. Bezuevsky, G. Schleifer, S. Menevich and H. Komissarchik possessed substantial wealth. M. Zhuravel, B. Feigelman, Yu. Komissarchik, P. Levin, M. Rabinovich, Yu. Utevskaya, F. Epstein and others had their small shops, or they took in the sublets of the more wealthy relatives . But the overwhelming majority of the local Jewish community lived in various crafts and carriages. At the bazaar and Kalinkovichi streets, one could meet thenHeder’s teachers (religious school) I. Berkovich, apothecary Z. Mikhlin, hairdresser I. Bukhman, firefighter fire brigade N. Factorovich, tanner M. Rabinovich, blacksmith Z. Wolfson, shoemaker M. Gershtein, carters M. Bargman and X Slobodsky, carpenter L. Dushchitsa and even the first in these places photographer V. Bukchin. Younger b . Bookchin, L. Liokumovich, I. Guzman, I. Chertok, A. Pickman, H. Roginsky, F. Vinokur, H. Golod, as well as their peers from nearby villages, towns, villages and hamlets, only about one hundred and fifty people, fought with the Germans on the Romanian front.

Since the beginning of the war, Minsk and other western provinces of the Russian Empire were in a state of martial law. Governors and military authorities received unlimited rights, strikes, rallies, demonstrations were banned. There was a “dry law”; for appearing in a drunken state on the street and in other public places, the guilty party was fined 25 rubles or put in a cell of the local chief for 7 days. Here, the moonshine plant flourished, a liter bottle of muddy “pervach” cost 5 rubles. The working day is not regulated. If during the war years the monthly salary of a Kalinkovichi railroad worker of the middle level (locomotive driver, conductor, switchman) increased about one and a half times and amounted to 45-60 rubles, then the prices for the same time increased by 5-7 times! Previously, in the class 3 buffet at the Kalinkovichi railway station, decent portions of cabbage soup with meat and roast cost 10 kopeks, porridge with butter - 5 kopecks, and the bread was generally free for them, now the worst quality dinner cost there is already 1 ruble 20 kopecks. Removable housing previously cost 3-5 rubles, now - 10-12. Less pension contributions, “for the needs of war and the Red Cross,” firewood, kerosene, a bathhouse, and schooling for children, in order to have a decent diet and buy some clothes, there wasn’t much in the family budget. . In the richest assortment of the retail shop on Pochtovaya Street (now the Euroset store, an elegant two-story house opposite the Yubileiny grocery store), a winter sheepskin case cost 170 rubles, a pair of boots - 20-25 rubles, a cotton shirt - 2 rubles 50 kopecks, a cigarette case - 20 rubles, candles - 2 rubles per pound (410 gr.). In the next grocery store prices per pound were: butter - 4 rubles, sugar - 1 rub. 50 kopecks, tea - 4 rubles, smoked sausage - 2 rubles, salt - 10 kopecks, a dozen herring from a barrel cost 3 rubles. People are more robust and they were indignant at the new price of Kiev candy for tea - ruble per pound! At the bazaar, rye pood cost 2 rubles 35 kopecks, potatoes - 75 kopecks, hay - 80 kopecks.

... In the last issue of 1916, the Russian Flag newspaper reported: “Russia is experiencing an extremely curious epoch. In its history there is definitely a sharp break. For the worse or for the better, it will lead our state - the future will show. It is impossible to stop the rapid run of current national and political events. It remains only to pray to the All-Seeing Eye to maintain in the Russian people its inexhaustible endurance in the struggle for the freedom and happiness of Russia. Happy New Year, reader, with the new happiness of Russia! ”Storm approaching was also felt at the“ top ”, as evidenced by an entry in the personal diary of a Moscow aristocrat. “... There is a continuous cry of indignation everywhere. If the king had appeared at present in Red Square, he would have been greeted with whistles. And the queen would be torn to pieces. The workers accuse her of starving the people.

In Kalinkovichi, a place and at the station, among the literate public, the text of the State Duma deputy P. Milyukov, banned by censorship, illegally printed speech with the headline "Stupidity or treason?" “We have lost faith,” she said, “that this power can lead us to victory.” If we said that our government has neither the knowledge nor talents needed for the present minute, now this power has fallen below the level at which it stood in peacetime. ”

Other inhabitants, who were hungry and angry at the power, told each other the capital anecdote brought by someone from the train passengers:

- Rasputin noticed that the heir to the throne, the youth Alex, was almost every day in tears. Asks: “What happened, Your Imperial Highness? Why do you cry so often? ”-“ But how else, ”says the prince,“ judge, holy father, yourself: when the Russians are beaten at the front, Papa is crying, and I am with him, and when the Germans are beaten, mother cries, and I'm with her. "

Who was Grigory Rasputin, and what place he occupies in the royal family, everyone in the Kalinkovichi knew. The fact is that his personal secretary and trusted person was the well-known 55-year-old Aron Simanovich, the former owner of a jewelry store in Mazyr. “During the war,” he says in his memoirs, “very many young Jews addressed me with pleas to release them from military service. There were many ways to do this, but I always chose the most convenient for this case. However, there was often no legal opportunity at all, and I had to resort to exceptional measures. ” Appeared to him and countrymen - through his elder brotherHaim Simanovich, who lived in Kalinkovichi. He was a companion of H. Gammelstein, selling in his shop (now the AnRi shopping center) jewelry and other “red” goods. When, in the first days of January, vague rumors spread at first, and then the newspapers came with an official report about the murder of the all-powerful "old man" in St. Petersburg, these contacts, to the great regret, of the Kalinkovichi financiers, broke off. The conversations in the village were also, in general, sympathetic: "Here, for once, the peasant got to the royal choir - to tell the kings the truth - and the pans destroyed him."

But back to the events of the revolution. On March 2, Emperor Nicholas II, who was in Pskov, signed on his own behalf and on behalf of his son Alexei the Manifesto on the abdication in favor of his brother, Grand Duke Mikhail Alexandrovich. But the next day he refused to accept the crown, and the autocracy in Russia fell. On March 2, after negotiations between the representatives of the Provisional Committee of the State Duma and the Executive Committee of the Petrograd Soviet, the Provisional Government was formed, headed by the liberal Prince G. E. Lvov.

It seems that the first vague rumors about the revolution in Petrograd began to spread around the Kalinkovichi railway station and the town already on March 3, when official notifications about the change of power were received by telegraph. The next day, rumors intensified, work ceased everywhere, people took to the streets, discussing the sudden news. When, on the morning of March 5, from the Petrograd train, an excited crowd (it was increased by peasants who arrived at the Sunday bazaar) got copies of a hastily printed manifesto about the tsar's denial and fresh newspapers, there was general rejoicing.

By that time, the Gerchikov family had already moved from Kalinkovichi to Gomel, where the events of 1917 caught them. “In Gomel,” recalled M. Gerchikov, “the news of the overthrow of the tsar arrived on March 2 of the old style.” I remember, returning in the afternoon from the gymnasium, I heard this news on the way and, entering the house, I immediately blurted out: “They threw the Tsar!”. At first, the family perceived it as a boyish mischief on my part; my father even strictly warned me not to talk about such dangerous nonsense. He himself quickly got dressed and went out into the street. Returning half an hour back, he, joyful, confirmed my "stupidity." Here we are all - both old and young - poured out of the apartments. The streets were crowded with people. Some were already scraps of red matter - a symbol of revolution. Several people climbed onto the roof of the pharmacy and shot out from there a two-headed royal eagle. Someone disarmed the police who came across. Everyone forgot for a while about the burden and hardship; the city exulted! "

Here is another sketch that was observed in those days by the 17-year-old son of the Belarusian railroad worker M.T. Lynkov, and later transferred to the pages of his story "Mikolka-steam locomotive". She was very popular in the 50s - 70s of the last century among Soviet schoolchildren and was included in the program of studying Belarusian literature.“... Above the station building a huge red flag fluttered in the wind. On the platform and on the roads crowded people, and all are so funny, noisy. The gendarme and the trace have caught a cold, and he has so much calmed his eyes, wiping around the bell in his red hat all day. The bosses hid somewhere, and the officers, who were always apparently invisible in the trains and trains passing through the station, disappeared. But this was not the most surprised Mikolka - he boldly walked into that room, where he couldn’t go even with his father. No one detained him. In the first-class hall, almost the entire wall was occupied by the most great portrait of the king. This very portrait has now been torn off by the depot workers. Torn off, as they say, "with meat".The royal legs in glossy boots were already thrown on the floor, a gold-embroidered uniform, and only one head under the crown, clinging to nails, was still hanging on the wall. It was to this head that the depot workers were now stretching with a gaff. Soon the king's head, with the angle of the frame and sticky lime, flew down and, raising clouds of dust, collapsed on the floor. And everyone began to sneeze and laugh together:

“Only the benefits of the king, that we can clean our noses,” the workers said, when one of the porters took a broom and began to sweep the king, lime, and rubbish into a pile, to throw everything in the trash bin.

- Here, brother, like kings are shed! - someone said right in Mikolka’s ear, and again the crowd laughed gaily.

In the middle of the last century, the memories of V.I. Mazurkevich about the spontaneous revolutionary rally held in the city on March 5. “... The large courtyard of the male gymnasium was an extraordinary spectacle. One after another speakers spoke with fiery speeches. They said that for the third year there was a war for the interests of the capitalists and with each passing day more and more victims. The end of the war can be brought closer only by the people, if it completes the revolution and takes power into its own hands. Everywhere, the slogans “Long live a democratic republic!”, As well as other revolutionary content, were burning.

Undoubtedly, on the square near the Kalinkovichi railway. The station also held a similar rally in early March with the participation of workers, employees and soldiers of the artillery park. Red flags were handed out, red bows were distributed and attached to coats, coats and overcoats. From the high wooden porch of the station they read the royal manifesto of the abdication and a telegram about the transfer of power to the Provisional Government. The rally organizers were local social democrats and social revolutionaries (“Socialist-Revolutionaries”) who emerged from the “underground”, the number of which increased markedly due to the railway workers who were evacuated from the west . Among the speakers could well be distinguished by their liberal viewsthe head of the Podolsk locomotive depot Blinov, a member of the officially existing before the revolution of the Constitutional Democratic Party . Several workers, to the cheer of the crowd, threw the crowned royal double-headed eagles from the facades of the station and the post and telegraph office to the ground. Probably got under the hot hand, and Kalinkovichi "peace officers". Police Inspector A.Ya. Although Makakovnyuk remained alive (in the document of 1927, he was listed as a stoker in the district hospital, deprived of voting rights), and to gendarme Ye.A. Yanovtsu and police officer Kamaev were less fortunate, in the list of 1920 both are marked as "dead".

If the news from the capital reached Kalinkovichi, which were stationed at the railway, quickly, official news of the change of power reached the distant volost centers and villages lost in the forests and marshes of the present Kalinkovichi district in two or three weeks. At the end of March, the Council of Workers 'and Soldiers' Deputies was already operating at the Kalinkovichi railway station without prior arrangement. He submitted to the Gomel Council, interacted with the Rechytsa district commissioner of the Provisional Government and the military authorities. In early April, when instructions were received from Minsk on the organization of temporary executive committees in the localities, they were elected in the Dudichi volost and the town of Kalinkovichi (until the end of 1917 he shared power with the bourgeois government).The euphoria of the first post-revolutionary days began to decline, the war continued, the prices of basic necessities grew. And then there were very few people in Kalinkovichi from among railway workers, merchants, craftsmen and local intelligentsia, who knew something about the Great French Revolution more than a century ago. They, too, exulted, repeated at once the famous names of the former and present fighters for justice and freedom, but vaguely suspected that a new, more powerful revolutionary wave was coming after the first, which would smash all the familiar world order and destroy many.


